January 16 2014

Data type : some unit of data and the behavior that you use to interact with it, ie the actions that you can perform on that data

Numbers, booleans
Quasi data type: string. But strings actually work like data structures in most instances.

Data structure: a group of data types held together by some common theme.
We don't have a character data type so we treat strings as data types
Collections(lists): hashes and arrays
Object

If ruby were a procedural language like c we would know everything there is to know about ruby. but ruby is an object oriented language

OO is an idea of how we structure data. act of programming is mostly procedural

Ennumeration starts to move us toward object orientation. Instead of using a while loop to iterate, we use a method on an object.

since ruby is OO, we don't want to split up behavior in terms of loop and data.

write a loop that will print out one by one 
range is a data type probably exclusive to ruby.

5.upto(10) {|num| puts "I <3 #{num} "}

whenever you see yield whatever block your put it cuts and pastes it into yield

when you see { } it is either a hash or a block. if its a block you can replace with do , end

write a method that takes a block as an argument and takes a collection as an argument , will loop over that collection ni reverse order and apply whatever behavior you give it to each element of that collection in reverse order

enumerable 

.each is used to 
perform an action with each item in the collection

.map returns new array with the results of running block once for every element in array
perform an action on each item in a collection saving the result to a new collection
the items are mapped from one collection to another

due to implicit return the last statement of any block is the return value
join is defined only for arrays so its not in enumerable

join does not take a block. new_strings = albums.join(" ")

.join concatenates each item in an array with a separator string between

EACH
MAP
JOIN
SELECT
REDUCE (inject)

reduce does something very weird. also known as inject. it applies an action to each element in a collection while keeping a variable expressing the result of the past actions

a block is a chunk of code. unlike a method it has access by default to the current scope. it only does implicit return.

yield will allow you to pass an action into the context of a method

the term we are using to describe where we save information and get information from is storage

storage: file system, database

file. a+ read write, starts at tend of file if the file exists, otherwise creates a new file for reading and writing

modes worth knowing are : r, r+ a+

file stream, its like a pipe into a specific point.

Manipulating strings
parse
.upcase, .downcase
.split
.gsub           regular expressions
.includ?

.gsub will find all instances and replace them 






















