m
January 13 2014

Ruby: PRY, Ruby, ruby interpreters
Servers: SQL interacts with psql (interpreter). Relational, DBs Postgres[gi] (RDBMS)
Rails framework: rack turns requests into commands and ruby does stuff and returns response. Rails is a series of conventions and ways of working with the server
Active Record and embedded ruby are ruby programs that help us
Sinatra framework allows you to write simple applications really fast
Http: (tcp, ip)
Modeling is the hardest thing to do. 
Client / server model describes computer action. P2P is another one.
Client is making a request from a server, http 
Client / end user sits at the front end
Browser is a program that runs technologies on top of it, inclding html / css, javascript
Javascript has nothing to do with java, much derided, now gaining cache
A framework is a collection of conventions and technologies that help us write programs more effectively, create models
The major backend framework we are learning is rails, also sinatra
On the front end we are going to use backbone (javascript framework), ember and angular are great too
MVC idea is that you have a model (representation of data you will be working with)
Model: view, controller (stands between the view and the model). 
Once we have the model and view set we only have to change the controller. Putting a wall between our data and our presentation of that data. 
The web application exists in multiple places at once

Week 1
M Intro to Ruby / Git
T Computing / Ruby methods and loops
W Collections in ruby / blocks and enumeration 
Th Manipulating strings
F Intro to objects / OOP and comprehensive lab

Today
Command line / terminal
Spectable and window management
Hipchat
Intro to ruby and git

Command line is important in explicitness 
pwd print working directory. File system is like a tree.
cd change directory. moves us around the tree. type cd with nothing you pop back to home directory, or cd ~
~ is an alias for home
cd / takes you to root, thetop level. home is the home of the user.
ls lists what is in the current directory
ls -a lists hidden files
. means here .. means above directory   . is unnecessary to write. 
cd .. takes you to above directory
By pressing tab you will cycle through 
Bash is the program we are interacting with the computer through. there are other terminal programs.
mkdir name_of_folder makes a directory
clear clears the screen
mkdir /dev2 makes a directory on root, / means root
rm -r dev  removes a direcotry, remove recursively. rm removes files/folders from system
Recursive keeps going again and again and again
touch creates a file
subl file opens the file
cat file 
man cat
man stands for manual. man program tells you what it is synopsis describes what flags you can add
go down by pushing down. press q to get out
touch -h, -h is common will give you basic usage info (help?)
ls -l is another way to list
unix has a permission system, basis of safety and file integrity. file security
ls -l lists all the owners of files. users can be grouped:
three levels: owner, group, anyone else
d directory, read , write, execute
size of file and time of last modification
you can put flags next to each other ls -la
sudo can get you around all permissions. super user do. super user is someone who has ownership rights to every file on the computer. you need to have admin rights and put in the password
gui and terminal do the same things but in different ways. bash born again shell. sh, the shell, encapsulates operating system. 
We set up profiles for bash. We personalized (or de personalized) our terminals.
if you're going to make changes to bash profile make a backup
cp is copy
mv means move, basically the way to rename a file
showfiles, hidefiles shows and hides hidden files in gui
mou is a useful program for writing text files
reload will reload the terminal
cat /etc/paths executable programs list. bin = binary files instead of text files. /bin programs accessible to everyone. /usr/bin programs that are accessible to users.
spectable will help us manage our windows and workflow

Ruby
syntax C style. (optional). interpreted language
major programming language. Matz. 
code is either compiled or interpreted.
compiled: the compiler turns it into binary. you then execute the compiled code
interpreter is a running on your computer and executtes. change the program that is running in real time.
ruby is interpreted by ruby or pry
paradigms: procedural, object oriented OO, functional
ruby is a multi paradigm language, but at its heart it is object oriented. 
everything is an object, or almost everything..

ls piece_of_data lists the methods you can perform on that data
data type: a description of a class of data and a series of methods that work with this data
23.class - fixnum, ls 23 lists methods you can perform on fixnum
in ruby we use dot notation. on the end of an object you put a dot then the name of the method you want to run on that object.
23.next - 24, returns next integer up
methods have return values. 
object.method(arguments)
false, true are also objects (booleans?)

Data Types:
numbers: fixnums, floats
True / False (boolean values, each is its own data type)
Strings, to_s turns something into a string
pretty_print will print the object in a more readable format
.upcase, .downcase
ruby docs ruby-doc.org will help
api is interface we surround code with, so other programs can interact with that code via that interface
= is the assignment operator. it is not equals.
== is equals
methods with ! change the object. not always the case though. ruby is inherently mutable
mjs_number += 1 gets you 46
sugar: a syntactic thing that makes it easier to write something
mjs_number = mjs_number + 1
includes -=, *=, /=, %=
ruby is a loosely typed language. data types are not as strict as other languages
generally write variable names in snake_case, best_album
if the best album is a constant, BEST_ALBUM. if you try to reassign you get a warning
CamelCase is another naming convention.
start variables with a letter. ? at the end of methods if it returns a boolean, ! if it mutates the object
REPL. Read eval print loop
ruby filename.rb runs the interpreter
gets method gets info from the user. add .chomp to chop off the enter
puts "Hello #{name} " is string interpolation
.eql? is also a comparison operator, also != not equal to
operators that work exclusively on boolean values && , || or, !false

Process / Work Flow
Standadization, Framework, manage complexity
Who is doing what when where how
Git - the defacto standard for version control
Git is a distributed version control system. DVCS
We have a snapshot of what our project looks like at a specific point in time and we can go back to it.
VCS is a linked timeline of snapshots
Distributed - git is a peer to peer system, rather than having a central depository
git was invented by linus trovalt

init stands for initialize
git init -initializes empty git repository
git status -states of the files in relation to last commit or snapshot
a repository is a collection of files and folders under management by git
git doesnt automatically track your files -- you add files to the index
git add kitten.rb
+ indicates that we have changes that are staged but havent been committed 
git commit -m "initial commit"
creates an initial snapshot.
git log -gives you a history of commits
! means something has changed. git status to check, checks current state of files to last commit
changes not staged for commit.. 
1. move changes from your work space to your index (or stage)
git diff will tell you exactly what the changes are
git add kitten.rb to put it in staging area
git status -changes to be committed
git checkout master 
git branch dogs  -cloning the current set of snapshots, like a different cut
git checkout dogs    -switches to the dogs branch
git merge dogs   --brings in any commits from another branch into the branch in question 


homework:
typing in code in pry, on github



https://github.com/ga-students/WDI_NYC_12/blob/master/w01/d01/ASSIGNMENT_FILES/familiarity.rb


http://try.github.io/

















